doc: add pagestorage v3 design doc (#4804)
pingcap/tiflash: docs/design/0000-00-01-architecture-of-storage-engine-pagestorage.md

The below picture describes the "Delta ValueSpace" and "Stable ValueSpace" of DT. The data in "Delta ValueSpace" is continuously updated. After `delta merge` happened, the delta data in PageStorage will be read and compacted into the "Stable ValueSpace".

![tiflash-dt-architecture](./images/tiflash-dt-architecture.png)

As one of the important components of DT, PageStorage mainly provides a KV storage service which also support MVCC. Unlike other KV services, the KV interface provided by PageStorage is limited. Key is limited to uint64_t, Value is limited to a buffer or a array of buffer(we called it fields) or null.

## Capability

PageStorage supported: 

- Disk-based store
- Write/Read operation atomicity
- Full MVCC function 
- KV store function
- GC

## Design

Currently, there are three versions of PageStorage (V1, V2, V3). We won't describe the details of the V1/V2 in this article. The V2 design and implementation lead to high write amplification and CPU usage under some scenarios, so we propose the V3 version.

> ### V3 version
> 
> After our customers used TiFlash, we found some problems with the V2 version in the actual production environment.
> 
> 1. **There is a risk of data loss in the meta part**. As long as the `checksum` and `buffer size` fields in a single meta buffer are damaged at the same time, the subsequent buffers will be unavailable.This situation may happen when When the disk failure or the meta been changed due to wrong operation.
> 2. **The snapshot of MVCC needs to be optimized**. First, the memory occupied by the snapshot can be reduced. Secondly, There are no need such a complex structure to implement MVCC.
> 3. **The GC write amplification in the data part is too severe, The GC task is too heavy**. Since the data part is composed of append write, `compact gc` is frequently triggered, The `compact gc` means PageStorage need read all of the valid data from the disk, then rewrite it into a new file. Each round of GC brings additional read and write overhead.
> 
> Besides these three problems, we also changed the `lock` implements and the `CRC` implements.
> 
> ![tiflash-ps-v3-architecture](./images/tiflash-ps-v3-architecture.png)
> 
> The V3 version of PageStorage consists of two main components, one is `WALStore` and the other is `BlobStore`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Background
We found some problems with the V2 version in the actual production environment.

1. **There is a risk of data loss in the meta part**. As long as the `checksum` and `buffer size` fields in a single meta buffer are damaged at the same time, the subsequent buffers will be unavailable. This situation may happen when the disk failure happens or the meta part is changed by an unexpected operation.
2. **The snapshot of MVCC needs to be optimized**. First, the CPU usage occupied by the snapshot should be reduced. Secondly, the implementation of MVCC structure is too complex to be understood and maintained.
3. **The GC write amplification in the data part is high and the GC task is too heavy**. Since the data part is composed of append write, `compact gc` is frequently triggered. Besides, the meta part is bound to a data part by "PageFile", meaning that we have to apply `compact gc` to compact the small data in the meta part. The `compact gc` means PageStorage need read all of the valid data from the disk, then rewrite it into a new file. Each round of GC brings additional read and write overhead.

Besides these three problems, we also changed the `lock` implements and the `CRC` implements.

### V3 version

![tiflash-ps-v3-architecture](./images/tiflash-ps-v3-architecture.png)

The V3 version of PageStorage consists of two main components, one is `WALStore` and the other is `BlobStore`.
```

> # Architecture Of Storage Engine - PageStorage

Reviewer: change the filename to "2022-04-28-architecture-of-storage-engine-pagestorage.md"

- Authors(order by last name): [JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang), [flowbehappy](https://github.com/flowbehappy), [Jiaqi Zhou](https://github.com/jiaqizho)
- Technical Writer: [shichun-0415](https://github.com/shichun-0415) , [Jiaqi Zhou](https://github.com/jiaqizho)

## Introduction

> `PageStorage` is the place where DT(DeltaTree Engine) actually stores data into. The latest data (i.e. delta data), the metadata in the engine are serialized directly into Pages. While the main data, i.e. stable data, is written in DTFiles format and managed as `ExternalPage`s in PageStorage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PageStorage` is the place where DT(DeltaTree Engine) actually stores data into. The latest data (i.e. delta data), and the metadata in the engine are serialized directly into Pages. While the main data (i.e. stable data), is written in DTFiles format and managed as `ExternalPage`s in PageStorage.
```

> You can see the picture below. Described in the picture is the design of the DT. PageStorage stored `delta`, the delta part of data always be updated. After `delta merge` happend, the delta in PageStorage will be merge to the stable part(in picture, it named stable value space).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below picture describes the "Delta ValueSpace" and "Stable ValueSpace" of DT. The data in "Delta ValueSpace" is continuously updated. After `delta merge` happened, the delta data in PageStorage will be read and compacted into the "Stable ValueSpace".
```

![tiflash-dt-architecture](./images/tiflash-dt-architecture.png)

As one of the important components of DT, PageStorage mainly provides a KV storage service which also support MVCC. Unlike other KV services, the KV interface provided by PageStorage is limited. Key is limited to uint64_t, Value is limited to a buffer or a array of buffer(we called it fields) or null.

## Capability

PageStorage supported: 

- Disk-based store
- Write/Read operation atomicity
- Full MVCC function 
- KV store function
- GC

## Design

> Currently there are three versions of PageStorage (V1, V2, V3). The V1 version is no longer used by DT. Due to compatibility considerations, it's still used in some components, we considered to remove it the future. It won't be covered too much in this article.
> 
> At present, most of our customers use the V2 version. Due to design issues, the V2 version has some problems that cannot be improved(will be introduced below), so we propose the V3 version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there are three versions of PageStorage (V1, V2, V3). We won't describe the details of the V1/V2 in this article. The V2 design and implementation lead to high write amplification and CPU usage under some scenarios, so we propose the V3 version.
```

Besides these three problems, we also changed the `lock` implements and the `CRC` implements.

### V3 version

![tiflash-ps-v3-architecture](./images/tiflash-ps-v3-architecture.png)

The V3 version of PageStorage consists of two main components, one is `WALStore` and the other is `BlobStore`.

- WALStore(Write Ahead Log Store): Using the write ahead log file format to manager the meta part.
- PageDirectory: Provides the function of MVCC. Smaller memory usage and faster speed than V2.
- BlobStore: Provides an spaces management. Using the address multiplexing to manage the data part.

#### WALStore

WALStore using the fixed block space to manager the meta.

![tiflash-ps-v3-walstore](./images/tiflash-ps-v3-wal-store.png)

WALStore used fixed size of a block to manage meta part.

- A block contains multiple meta records.
- If a block has some space unused, Also unused space size less than a meta record size. Then using a `padding` to full the unused space.

> If crc and meta size are broken at the same time. It is only need to discard the data in a single block, and the neighboring block(the prev block or next block) will be preserved. Because WALStore will read meta from single block, If single block got fault won't effect others. Also more convenient to troubleshoot the cause of meta errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file format is convenient to detect disk failure. If a disk failure happens, we can stop TiFlash from startup and returning wrong results. In the worst case when CRC and the length of a meta record are broken at the same time, we can try to discard the broken data by the fixed-length block, other blocks can be preserved and try to recover some data.
```

> WALStore provider two main interfaces:
> 
> - **apply**: After `apply`, the meta info will be serialized on disks. This happens after writing datas.
> - **read**: Read serialized meta info from disks. This will happen after `PageStorage` restored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

WALStore provides two main interfaces:

- **apply**: After `apply`, the meta info will be atomicity serialized on disks. This happens after writing data to BlobStore.
- **read**: Read serialized meta info from disks. This will happen when `PageStorage` is being restored.
```

0:8                 | Write Type       | Write batch operation type |
8:132               | Page Id          | The combine of namespace id and page id       |
132:260             | Version          | The combine of sequence and epoch             |
260:324             | Ref count        | The page be ref count  |

buffer(operate:del)

Bits                | Name             | Description.          |
--------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
0:8                 | Write Type       | Write batch operation type |
8:132               | Page Id          | The combine of namespace id and page id       |
132:260             | Version          | The combine of sequence and epoch             |

The page id in V3 is is a 128bit unsigned integer replace the 64bit(in v2). Because instead of generating three instances(meta/data/log) of PageStorage for each table, there are only four instances of PageStorage globally(log/data/meta/KVStore). So PageStorage need additional 64bit space (ie. namespace id) to distinguish different tables.

Multi of meta info will be conbimed into a block. So it is different with V2, WALStore added a WAL format to pack the meta struction. 

> Legacy record format:
> 
> ```
> +--------------+-----------+-----------+--- ... ---+
> |CheckSum (8B) | Size (2B) | Type (1B) | Payload   |
> +--------------+-----------+-----------+--- ... ---+
> ```
> 
> - CheckSum: 64bit hash computed over the record type and payload using checksum algo (CRC64)
> - Size: Length of the payload data
> - Type: Type of record(ZeroType, FullType, FirstType, LastType, MiddleType)
>   - The type is used to group a bunch of records together to represent
>   - blocks that are larger than kBlockSize
> - Payload: Byte stream as long as specified by the payload size
> 
> Recyclable record format:
> 
> ```
> +--------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+--- ... ---+
> |CheckSum (8B) | Size (2B) | Type (1B) | Log number (4B)| Payload   |
> +--------------+-----------+-----------+----------------+--- ... ---+
> ```
> 
> Same as above, with the addition of
> 
> - Log number: 32bit log file number, so that WALStore can distinguish between records written by the most recent log writer vs a previous one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Architecture Of Storage Engine - PageStorage

- Authors(order by last name): [JaySon-Huang](https://github.com/JaySon-Huang), [flowbehappy](https://github.com/flowbehappy), [Jiaqi Zhou](https://github.com/jiaqizho)

## Introduction

> PageStorage is one of the earliest components used in delta merge storage. In the early days of the TIFlash, PageStorage was used as the basic storage moudle, All of IO from DT will store into PageStorage. Over time, we only place elements of `delta` and `metadata of DT` in PageStorage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PageStorage (PS) is the place where DeltaTree Engine actually stores data into. The latest data (i.e. delta data), the metadata in the engine are serialized directly into Pages. While the main data, i.e. stable data, is written in DTFiles format and managed as `RefPage` in PS.
```

> PageStorage needs to handle a large amount of delta data read and write, this part of the data is hot data. And a small amount of DT meta information needs to be persisted, this part is cold data. The data of delta  will eventually be merged into the stable part, eq. stored in the DT file.

Author: introduce `stable` part .

> PageStorage needs to handle a large amount of delta data read and write, this part of the data is hot data. And a small amount of DT meta information needs to be persisted, this part is cold data. The data of delta  will eventually be merged into the stable part, eq. stored in the DT file.

Author: ie.

> PageStorage needs to handle a large amount of delta data read and write, this part of the data is hot data. And a small amount of DT meta information needs to be persisted, this part is cold data. The data of delta  will eventually be merged into the stable part, eq. stored in the DT file.

Reviewer 2: I suggest removing this irrelevant part.
```suggestion
```

> You can see the picture below. Described in the picture is the design of the entire DT. PageStorage carries the traffic of the upper half of DT.

Author: `PageStorage carries the traffic of the upper half of DT.` needs change.

![tiflash-dt-architecture](./images/tiflash-dt-architecture.png)

> As one of the important components of DMS, PageStorage mainly provides a KV storage service which also support MVCC. Unlike other KV services, the KV interface provided by PageStorage is limited. Key is limited to uint64_t, Value is limited to a buffer or a array of buffer(we called it fields) or null.

Author: `DMS` -> `DT`

--------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
0:8                 | Write Type       | Write batch operation type |
8:72                | Page ID  		  | The page Id           |

buffer list(op:ref)

Bits                | Name             | Description.          |
--------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
0:8                 | Write Type       | Write batch operation type |
8:72                | Page ID  		  | The page Id           |
72:136              | Origin Page ID   | The Origin page id    |

Field offsets 

Bits                | Name             | Description.          |
--------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
0:64                | Field Offset       | The field offset |
64:128              | Field Checksum | The field checksum |

The data part is more simple, it have not contain any of meta info, it only consists of buffer.

Both of data and meta, we used append write + sync IO to write the file, data clean will be done by GC part. Also the file size of both is limited. If the data is larger than 128M(default), a new file will be automatically generated.

#### MVCC

> `PageEntriesVersionSetWithDelta` is the main class of the MVCC, It's a big list, collect all version of page entries(it's a extension of Page object), The entries contain with every single page. Once snapshot created, the list will add a new version of page entries.

Author: `big list` -> `list of all version of page entries`

The API from PageStorage have a method named `getSnapshot()`. After call this method, MVCC will generate a snapshot which record all of page entries(in memory) in current time.

> Then every read API from PageStorage request the snapshot as one of the parameters.But by default, the snapshot can be nullptr, then we will create a new snapshot for it.

Author: 'we' changed

In read method, PageStorage will use snapshot + page ids to find the page entries. After we got the entries, we will read the data buffer from pagefile and combine it to a set of page, Then return to the caller.

Also anytime there is a del operation come, we will not immediately mark the data on the disk to be cleaned up. Instead GC part will do the clean job.

#### GC

> GC relative the snapshots release. If none of the snapshots in memory are released, then the GC will not clean up any data. In general, snapshots are released every once in a while, This will generate a lot of "expired" data on disk.

Author: `relative` -> `depend on`

Author: `every once in a while`

Author: remove `a lot of`, `depend on` xxxx

At each round of GC, the GC thread scans each pagefiles and calculates the valid rate of the pagefile through MVCC. valid rate equal to total valid size divide by total file size, If valid rate lower than 0.5(by default), we will do the compact GC. 

> The compact GC will compact the valid page into a new pagefile. This process is in order not to generate spatial magnification.But the same, it will produce write amplification.

Author: change `spatial magnification.`

During the GC process, we do not lock the entire PageStorage, but use more fine-grained locks to ensure that the current PageStorage can respond to read and write.

#### write/read example

After write request comes:

- Get a idle PageFileWriter(which is not locked), and locked it to avoid anther thread write. 
- Generate the meta record.
- Write buffer into the disk.
- Write the meta record into meta.

After read request comes:

- Get a snapshot from caller or create a snapshot.
- Find the entries from the MVCC by snapshot + page ids.
- Using entries, read from disk.
- Combine the buffer and entries into pages and then return to the caller.

> 

Reviewer 2: We don't need to introduce V2 here. Simply add a link to V2 design.

> 8:72                | Page ID  		  | The page Id           |
> 
> buffer list(op:ref)
> 
> Bits                | Name             | Description.          |
> --------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
> 0:8                 | Write Type       | Write batch operation type |
> 8:72                | Page ID  		  | The page Id           |
> 72:136              | Origin Page ID   | The Origin page id    |
> 
> Field offsets 
> 
> Bits                | Name             | Description.          |
> --------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
> 0:64                | Field Offset       | The field offset |
> 64:128              | Field Checksum | The field checksum |
> 
> The data part is more simple, it have not contain any of meta info, it only consists of buffer.
> 
> Both of data and meta, we used append write + sync IO to write the file, data clean will be done by GC part. Also the file size of both is limited. If the data is larger than 128M(default), a new file will be automatically generated.
> 
> 
> #### MVCC
> 
> `PageEntriesVersionSetWithDelta` is the main class of the MVCC, It's a big list, collect all version of page entries(it's a extension of Page object), The entries contain with every single page. Once snapshot created, the list will add a new version of page entries.
> 
> The API from PageStorage have a method named `getSnapshot()`. After call this method, MVCC will generate a snapshot which record all of page entries(in memory) in current time.
> 
> Then every read API from PageStorage request the snapshot as one of the parameters.But by default, the snapshot can be nullptr, then we will create a new snapshot for it.
> 
> In read method, PageStorage will use snapshot + page ids to find the page entries. After we got the entries, we will read the data buffer from pagefile and combine it to a set of page, Then return to the caller.
> 
> Also anytime there is a del operation come, we will not immediately mark the data on the disk to be cleaned up. Instead GC part will do the clean job.
> 
> #### GC
> 
> GC relative the snapshots release. If none of the snapshots in memory are released, then the GC will not clean up any data. In general, snapshots are released every once in a while, This will generate a lot of "expired" data on disk.
> 
> At each round of GC, the GC thread scans each pagefiles and calculates the valid rate of the pagefile through MVCC. valid rate equal to total valid size divide by total file size, If valid rate lower than 0.5(by default), we will do the compact GC. 
> 
> The compact GC will compact the valid page into a new pagefile. This process is in order not to generate spatial magnification.But the same, it will produce write amplification.
> 
> During the GC process, we do not lock the entire PageStorage, but use more fine-grained locks to ensure that the current PageStorage can respond to read and write.
> 
> #### write/read example
> 
> After write request comes:
> 
> - Get a idle PageFileWriter(which is not locked), and locked it to avoid anther thread write. 
> - Generate the meta record.
> - Write buffer into the disk.
> - Write the meta record into meta.
> 
> After read request comes:
> 
> - Get a snapshot from caller or create a snapshot.
> - Find the entries from the MVCC by snapshot + page ids.
> - Using entries, read from disk.
> - Combine the buffer and entries into pages and then return to the caller.
> 

Reviewer 2: We don't need to introduce V2 here. Simply add a link to V2 design.
```suggestion
```
